# Energy Management System – Distributed Systems Assignment 1 & Assignment 2 & Assignment 3

## Overview

This project implements an **Energy Management System** built using a **microservices architecture** that follows both the **Request–Reply Communication Paradigm** and the **Asynchronous Communication Paradigm**. It also includes practical components related to **Web Sockets**.
It allows authenticated users to **monitor, manage and observe the conumption of smart energy metering devices** via a **web-based frontend**, with services communicating through **REST APIs**, **RabbitMQ**, **WebSockets** and deployed using **Docker containers**.

The system ensures **secure access**, **role-based authorization and authentication**, and **loose coupling** between services through an **API Gateway** built as a **Reverse Proxy**. The application introduces **event-driven**, asynchronous communication through **RabbitMQ**, enabling **real-time streaming and overconsumption alert notifications**, processing, and aggregation of device measurements, as well as synchronization between microservices. The customer support feature is integrated through a **real-time messaging chat component** built usign a **WebSocket Microservice**. 

## System Components

### 1. Frontend (ReactJS)

- Built using **React**, **JavaScript**, and **CSS**.
- Features a **bright pink and pastel theme**.
- Provides role-based pages:
  - **Admin Dashboard:**
    -  manage users and devices
    - assign devices to users
    - see and respond to user chat messages
  - **User (Client) Dashboard:** 
    - view devices assigned to their account
    - check daily historical energy consumption for secfic devices
    - receive alerts for overconsumption
    - interact with the chat system

#### Start the Frontend

```bash
cd frontend
npm install
npm start
```
The frontend will be available at: http://localhost:3000

### 2. Microservices Layer

#### User Management Microservice

- Provides **CRUD operations** for managing users.  
- Stores user information in a **User Database**.  
- Verifies permissions and roles for protected operations.  
- Publishes **user synchronization events** to a point-to-point **synchronization-broker (RabbitMQ)** when a new user is added.
- Is available internally at: http://localhost:8081/user.

#### Device Management Microservice

- Provides **CRUD operations** for managing energy devices.  
- Inside **Device Database**, it stores information such as:  
  - `id`  
  - `name`  
  - `maximumConsumption`  
  - `yearOfManufacture`
- Manages **device–user associations**.  
- Communicates with the **User Management Microservice** for mapping relationships.  
- Publishes **device synchronization events** to a point-to-point **synchronization-broker (RabbitMQ)** when a new device is added.
- **Consumes the messages** sent from the User Microservice in order to update its own **user-replica** table.
- Is available internally at: http://localhost:8082/device.

#### Authentication Microservice

- Handles **user registration** and **login**.  
- Stores and verifies credentials in a **Credential Database**.  
- Generates **JWT tokens** for secure communication.  
- Prevents unauthorized access to restricted endpoints.  
- Acts as a **Middleware**: all requests to user or device microservices are redirected first to authentication microservice which validates the credentials and accepts or denies the communication.
- Is available internally at: http://localhost:8083/authentication/*.

#### Monitoring Microservice

- Subscribes to the **data-collection-broker (RabbitMQ)** to receive smart-meter readings generated by the **Device Data Simulator**.
- **Consumes the messages** sent from the Device Microservice in order to update its own **device-replica** table.
- Detects energy overconsumption and publishes **alert events** to **notification-broker (RabbitMQ)** when limits are exceeded.
- Processes incoming measurement messages with the structure:
  - `timestamp`
  - `device_id`
  - `measurement_value`
- Aggregates raw 10-minute measurements into hourly energy consumption totals for a specified device.
- Stores computed energy data inside the dedicated **Monitoring Database**.
- Exposes **REST endpoints** for retrieving daily per-device energy consumption, which are used by the frontend to render consumption charts.
- Is available internally at: http://localhost:8084/monitoring/*.

Each microservice is implemented using **Spring Boot (Java)** and exposes **REST APIs**.

### 3. Reverse Proxy

- Acts as the **entry point** for all client requests.  
- Is available at: http://localhost:80.
- Routes each request to the correct **microservice**.  
- Validates **authentication tokens** and applies **authorization**.  
- Is implemented using **Traefik**.  
- Ensures that only **authenticated** and **authorized** users can access internal endpoints.
- It is also used as a **Load Balancer**.

### 4. Device Data Simulator

- Is a standalone **Python** desktop application.
- Generates synthetic smart meter readings every 10 minutes.
- Simulates realistic usage patterns (lower at night, higher in evening, random variations).
- Publishes **JSON measurements** to a point-to-point **data-collection-broker (RabbitMQ)**  when a new measurement is generated.
- The **device_id** is configurable in a local configuration file.
- Example message:
```bash
{
  "timestamp": "2025-01-10T14:20:00",
  "device_id": "c7637f5c-9462-4060-ad4b-28372e805d89",
  "measurement_value": 0.42
}
```

### 5. RabbitMQ

Three main brokers/queues enable asynchronous communication:

- Point-to-point **Data Collection Broker**:
  - receives device measurement messages from the **Device Data Simulator**.
  - Delivers them to the **Monitoring Microservice**.

- Point-to-point **Synchronization Broker**:
  - microservices **publish synchronization** events here to keep each other updated:
    - User Management Microservice - publishes user events.
    - Device Management Microservice - publishes device events.
  - Device Microservice and Monitoring Microservice - **subscribe** and update replica tables.

- Point-to-point **Notification Broker**:
  - receives alert notifications from the **Monitoring Microservice**.
  - Delivers them to the **WebSocket Microservice**.

This ensures data consistency without direct internal REST calls between microservices.

 ### 6. WebSocket

- This microservice enables **real-time communication**.
- Uses **WebSocket protocol** and pushes messages instantly to connected clients.
- The **real-time chat system** supports 3 response modes:
  - **Rule-based responses**
    - predefined answers for common questions
    - fast, deterministic replies
  - **Admin responses**
    - messages sent manually by admins
    - allows human interaction and support
  - **AI Bot responses**
    - integrates an AI-powered assistant
    - provides contextual and dynamic replies
- **Consumes the messages** sent from the Monitoring Microservice in order to **catch overconsumption alerts** and notify the impacted users through the frontend.
- Is available internally at: http://localhost:8085/websocket.

## Docker Deployment

The system is fully containerized using **Docker** for modularity, scalability, and portability.

### Build Docker Images

Run the following commands inside each microservice folder:

```bash
docker build -t user-management-microservice .
docker build -t device-management-microservice .
docker build -t authentication-microservice .
docker build -t monitoring-microservice .
docker build -t device-data-simulator .
docker build -t websocket-microservice .
```

For the React frontend:

```bash
docker build -t frontend .
```

### Run All Containers

Use **Docker Compose** to run all services together:

```bash
docker-compose up --build
```

This will:
- Build all microservices.
- Launch all microservices and PostgreSQL databases.
- Connect all containers in a shared **Docker network**.
- Expose the microservices on the ports defined in **compose.yaml** file.

To stop the containers:

```bash
docker-compose down
```

## Application Flow (Assignment 1)

1. The user registers or logs in through the **frontend**.
2. The **Reverse Proxy** sends the credentials to the **Authentication Microservice** for validation.
2. The **Authentication Microservice** verifies credentials and issues a **JWT token**.
4. If the validation succeedes, **Reverse Proxy** forwards the request.
5. Requests are routed to the appropriate microservice:
    - **Admin**: performs CRUD operations on users and devices; assigns devices to users.
    - **User** (**Client**): views assigned devices.

## Application Flow (Assignment 2)

1. The **Device Data Simulator** generates a measurement every 10 minutes.
2. It sends the measurement to **RabbitMQ’s data-collection-broker**.
3. The **Monitoring Microservice** consumes the message, aggregates values into hourly consumption, and stores them in the **Monitoring Database**.
4. When a new user is created, the **User Management Microservice** publishes a **User Synchronization Event**.
5. When a new device is created, the **Device Management Microservice** publishes a **Device Synchronization Event**.
6. The Device Management and Monitoring microservices **consume these events** and update their internal replica tables to remain consistent.
7. **Daily Consumption Charts** for a selected device can be seen in the frontend.

## Application Flow (Assignment 3)

1. The **Monitoring Microservice** continuously computes the hourly energy consumption data for devices.
2. If the hourly consumption value exceeds the maximum consumption threshold configured for a device, the the service detects an **overconsumption event**. Then it publishes an alert event containing the details of the overconsumption (device identifier, consumption value, threshold, timestamp).
3. The **WebSocket Microservice** consumes the alert event and the affected user is notified in the frontend through a popup, which displays the details of the event.
4. From another popup, a user can open the **chat feature**, allowing him to send messages or ask questions.
5. When a user sends a message, the system first checks whether the message matches a **predefined rule-based response**:
    - If a rule is matched, the automated **rule-based bot immediately sends a response** to the user.
6. If **no predefined rule** matches the message, the user has two available options:
    - Request an **AI-generated response**, in which case the **AI bot responds immediately**.
    - **Wait for an admin response**, leaving the conversation open.
7. The admin can **view all active conversations** in the admin dashboard, including: user messages, automated bot responses and AI-generated responses.
8. The admin can **manually respond** to any user conversation, and the reply is **delivered to the user in real time via WebSocket**.


## Future Improvements - Load Balancing & Docker Swarm

- A **Load Balancing Microservice**, deployed in **Docker Swarm**, acts as the single consumer of device data from the RabbitMQ data-collection queue.
- Based on a **replica selection strategy (ex: Round Robin Strategy)**, messages are distributed to dedicated **ingestion queues** corresponding to each Monitoring Microservice replica.
- This approach enables **horizontal scaling**, **fault tolerance**, and **balanced processing** of device measurements.